[Go to table of contents](../../readme.md)

# Programming with R

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this week you should be able to:

* Write an if-else expression

* Write a for loop, a while loop, and a repeat loop

* Define a function in R and specify its return value [see Functions Part 1 and Part 2]

* Describe how R binds a value to a symbol via the search list

* Define what lexical scoping is with respect to how the value of free variables are resolved in R

* Describe the difference between lexical scoping and dynamic scoping rules

* Convert a character string representing a date/time into an R datetime object.

## Control Structures

Control structures in R allow you to control the flow of execution of the program, depending on runtime conditions. Common structures are:

* `if`, `else`: testing a condition

* `for`: executing a loop a fixed number of times

* `while`: execute a loop while a condition is true

* `repeat`: execute an infinite loop

* `break`: break the execution of a loop

* `next`: skip an interation of a loop

* `return`: exit a function

Most control structures are not used in interactive sessions, but rather when writing functions or longer expressions.

### `if`-`else`

```r
if (<condition>) {
  # do something
} else {
  # do something else
}

if (<condition1>){
  # do something
} else if (<condition2>) {
  # do something different
} else {
  # do something different
}
```

```r
if (x > 3){
  y <- 10
} else {
  y <- 0
}
```

```r
y <- if(x > 3){
  10
} else {
  0
}
```

### `for` loops

`for` loops take an iterator variable and assign it values from a sequence or vector. For loops are most commonly used for iterating over the elements of an object (list, vector, etc/).

```r
> for (i in 1:10) {
+     print(i)
+ }
[1] 1
[1] 2
[1] 3
[1] 4
[1] 5
[1] 6
[1] 7
[1] 8
[1] 9
[1] 10
```

```r
> x <- c("a", "b", "c", "d")
> for(i in 1:4)
+ print(x[i])
[1] "a"
[1] "b"
[1] "c"
[1] "d"
> x <- c("a", "b", "c", "d")
> for(i in 1:4)
+ print(x[i])
[1] "a"
[1] "b"
[1] "c"
[1] "d"
> for(i in seq_along(x))
+ print(x[i])
[1] "a"
[1] "b"
[1] "c"
[1] "d"
> for(c in x)
+ print(c)
[1] "a"
[1] "b"
[1] "c"
[1] "d"
```

The `for` loops can be nested:

```r
> x <- matrix(1:6, 2, 3)
> 
> for(i in seq_len(nrow(x))){
+     for(j in seq_len(ncol(x))){
+         print(x[i, j])
+     }
+ }
[1] 1
[1] 3
[1] 5
[1] 2
[1] 4
[1] 6
```

### `while` loops

`while` loops begin by testing a condition. If it is true, they execute the loop body. Once the loop body is executed, the condition is tested again, and so forth.

```r
> count <- 0
> while(count < 10){
+     print(count)
+     count <- count + 1
+ }
[1] 0
[1] 1
[1] 2
[1] 3
[1] 4
[1] 5
[1] 6
[1] 7
[1] 8
[1] 9
```

### `repeat`, `next`, `break`

`repeat` initiates an infinite loop. The only way to exit a `repeat` loop is to call `break`.

```r
x0 <- 1
to1 <- 1e-8
repeat {
  x1 <- computeEstimate() # an example function
  if(abs(x1 - x0) < to1) {
    break
  } else {
    x0 <- x1
  }
```

`next` is used to skip an iteration of a loop:

```r
for(i in 1:100){
  if(i <= 20){
    # skip the first 20 iterations
    next
  }
  # do something here
}
```

`return` signals that a function should exit and return a given value.

## Functions

Open RStudio, create a new R script and put below code into.

```r
add2number <- function(x, y){
  x + y # return the sum of x and y
}
```

To run it in the console, you have to hightlight these lines and then click **Run** button.

Functions are stored as R object. In particular, they are R objects of class "function".

```r
f <- function(<arguments>){
  # do something
}
```

* Functions can be passed as aruments to other functions.
* Functions can be nested

### Arguments

Functions have *named aruments* which potentially have *default values*:

* The *formal arguments* are the arguments included in the function definition.
* The *formal function* returns a list of all the formal arguments of a function.
* Not every function call in R makes use of all the formal arguments.
* Function arguments can be missing or might have default values.

R function arguments can be matched positionally or by name:

```r
> mydata <- rnorm(100)
> sd(mydata)
[1] 1.008313
> sd(x = mydata)
[1] 1.008313
> sd(x = mydata, na.rm = FALSE)
[1] 1.008313
> sd(na.rm = FALSE, x = mydata)
[1] 1.008313
> sd(na.rm = FALSE, mydata)
[1] 1.008313
```

Even though it's legal, but it don't be recommended messing around with the order of the arguments too much since it can lead to some confusion.

When an argument is matched by name, it is "taken out" of the argument list and the remaining unnamed arguments are matched in the order that they are listed in the function definition.

```r
> args(lm)
function (formula, data, subset, weights, na.action, method = "qr", 
    model = TRUE, x = FALSE, y = FALSE, qr = TRUE, singular.ok = TRUE, 
    contrasts = NULL, offset, ...) 
NULL
```

The following two calls are equivalent:

```r
lm(data = mydata, y - x, model = F, 1:100)
lm(y - x, mydata, 1:100, model = F)
```

Most of the time, named arguments are useful on the command line when you have a long argument list and you want to use the defaults for everything except for an argument near the end of the list.

Named arguments also help if you can remember the name of argument and not its position on the argument list.

Function arguments can also be *partially* matched, which is useful for interactive work:

1. Check for exact match for a named argument
2. Check for a partial match
3. Check for a positional match

### Lazy Evaluation

You can set an argument value to `NULL`:

```r
f <- function(a, b = 1, c = 2, d = NULL) {

}
```

Arguments to functions are evaluated *lazily*, so they are evaluated only as needed.

```r
> f <- function(a, b){
+   a^2
+ }
> f(2)
[1] 4
```

Above function never actually uses the argument `b`, so calling `f(2)` will not produce an error because the `2` gets positionally matched to `a`.

```r
> f <- function(a, b) {
+     print(a)
+     print(b)
+ }
> f(45)
[1] 45
Error in f(45) : argument "b" is missing, with no default
```

`45` got printed first before the error was triggered. Once the function tried to evaluate `print(b)`, it had to throw an error.

